A walk around Haytor and its Quarries - Simon Avery

This is a lovely four mile stroll around Haytor and across open moorland to visit three of the five tranquil Haytor Quarries, a short section of the Granite Tramway and lots of interesting objects along the way. 

Our walk starts from the Upper Haytor car park (Pay and Display) and heads up to Haytor itself, before passing it on our left as we walk down to Haytor Quarry, the biggest and most visited of all the quarries on Haytor Down. This is a place rich in photo opportunities, and we point out several interesting features such as the rusty winch and some examples of tare and feather granite splitting. 

Often overlooked is the carved socket for one of the rock cranes buried in the grass, and the webpage below includes a picture of how the cranes would have looked during operation in the eighteenth century. It also details some of the history of the three generations of the Templer family who were so influential in this area. They quarried the high quality granite from here and ensured its distribution by building the Granite Tramway and Stover Canal. 

Once we've spent some time in Haytor Quarry, we leave via the waste heaps and join the Granite Tramway for a short while until we come to Holwell Junction, where a set of points splits the tramway to those quarries. The tramway carried short trains of four stout wooden wagons pulled by a team of 18 horses, hitched to either the front or rear depending on whether they were going up or down.

Further on, we'll pass a broken Apple crusher, an abandoned granite rail and a ruined stone building on our way to the famous beehive structure. After this, we circle back around behind Haytor and approach it by the third of our quarries, Rubble Heap Quarry. 

Most of this walk is on well defined paths across open moorland and has excellent views in all directions, particularly over South Devon and Teignmouth toward the English Channel. Our walk includes a descent to Holwell Quarry along a section of the tramway, and if the climb back up from this seems daunting, this part can be skipped and this would then make a somewhat gentler walk of three miles or so.

The full walk with some 60 photographs and a detailed map is available freely at https://dartmoorwalking.org/haytor   This is a new website aiming to encourage people to enjoy and learn about Dartmoor and its unique history. There are over thirty walks already, each with a self-guided map and details of interesting points along the way. Parking information is provided, together with a map of Dartmoor showing where each walk is sorted by area and length, and a GPX file of each trail. 

The original walk and photographs were made by Keith Ryan, a well known Dartmoor guide and creator of the Dartmoorcam website from which this walk originated.

